understanding yield, why is it
important and where do we use it?
to find the yield of a product or edible
product, for ordering, order the right amount
results in less wastage, to cost recipes,
to find the food cost or cost per portion
what is yield factor? yield
factor Y or yield percentage
the ratio of the useful amount after cleaning
or trimming compared to the as purchase product
here are a few abbreviations associated with yield,
as purchased or AP is equal to raw ingredients
edible portion EP is equal to edible portion
yield percentage of ingredients
EP divided by AP is equal to Y
this is used to find yield of an ingredient
EP divided by Y is equal to AP to find the AP
purchase weight AP multiplied by Y is equal
to EP to find the edible portion amount
ap dollars divided by Y is equal to ep
dollars to find the edible portion cost
breakdown of meats and fish all parts of the
product taken apart must be individually weighed
during butchery there is a loss of blood moisture
and fat the total weight loss of all products
should be the same as AP weight and total cost
understanding edible product cost or ep
dollars, the tenderloin weighs 4 kilos
the AP cost is $29.80 per kg the total AP cost is
$119.20 which is $29.80 per kg
multiplied by 4 kgs equivalent to $119.20 breakdown of the tenderloin:
fat: 15% or 600 grams, no cost to that, tip meat
20% or 800 grams equivalent to $23.84
usable meat 62.5% or 2.5 kgs, equivalent to $95.36
ep cost per kg is $95.36 divided
by 2.5 kgs is equal to $38.14
the new edible cost is $38.14
beef tenderloin breakdown clean
tenderloin chateaubriand Tournedo
Tournedo portioning, tail of
filet mignon filet mignon tied
fish butchery breakdown:
as purchased salmon, waste
consisting of bones head and skin
edible product or EP consisting of
usable trim and waste edible portion
usable trim and waste consisting of
scrap meat off the bone and off the head
factors that may affect your yield percentage
an employee's skill in cleaning the product will
have an enormous effect on the yield percentage,
skilled employees will not create as much waste
the size of the product also influences the
yield percentage cleaning smaller carrots
will create more waste and
a lower yield percentage
the condition of the product has an effect on
the yield if your operation is not using the
freshest product available the
yield percentage will be lower
yield and standard portion cost
with meat and fish, butcher test
test designed to determine standard portion
costs, for those items portioned before cooking
cooking loss test: test used to
determine standard portion cost
for those items portioned after cooking these
tests are useful when purchasing and ordering
cooking loss test: tests used to determine
standard potion cost for those items portioned
after cooking it is performed on products that
need to be cooked before portioning and serving
most often used on whole roast like lamb
beef, pork, poultry, turkey and chicken
the number of portions and portion cost
are determined after the cooking process
the actual procedure of the cooking
test is performed in a kitchen setting
cooking loss test: the following information is
recorded to determine the edible yield percentage
the number of portions, the edible cost per pound,
the edible cost per portion the cost factor
of the cooked product most of the steps in
preparing the cooking loss test are very
similar to those applied in preparing a butcher
test, managing food production: food losses through
simple product waste play a large role in overall
cost food waste can be the result of poor training
dull knives, improper peeling, cutting and prepping
techniques improper cooking methods and techniques
increase cooking time or temperature can
cause product shrinkage that increases
average portion cost, over under
portioning affects cost and customers
how to control this and for standards
standardized procedures and standardized recipes
lastly, consistency is key
to success in food service